
--------------------------------------------------
Contents
Contents
2
1
Introduction
3
2
Model Description
4
2.1
Model Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Model Parameterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Disease/Healthcare Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Approximated and Derived Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Data Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.1
Population Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.2
Vulnerability Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3.3
Mobility Data and Matrix Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3.4
COVID-19 Cases and Deaths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.5
Contact Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3.6
Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Model Initialization and Output
12
4
Model Open Source Code and Documentation
13
5
References
14
Acknowledgements
This model methodology overview was produced by the United Nations Ofﬁce for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Centre for Humanitarian Data, in partnership with the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHUAPL). Contributions to the model and corresponding
documentation were given by the following members of the JHUAPL Team: Matthew Kinsey, Kate
Tallaksen, R.F. Obrecht, Laura Asher, Cash Costello, Michael Kelbaugh, Howard Burkom, David Maxson,
Shelby Wilson, Jessica Dymond, and Jason Lee. Contributions were also given by the following members
of the OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data: Leonardo Milano, Josée Poirier, and Tinka Valentijn, and
Monica Turner (on secondment from MapAction). This work was made possible with funding from The
Rockefeller Foundation and the Governments of the Netherlands, Germany, Belgium, and the United
Kingdom. For more information, please contact the Centre for Humanitarian Data at
centrehumdata@un.org.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 2

--------------------------------------------------
1
Introduction
Severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) emerged in Wuhan, China, in November
2019. By October 2020, this virus had resulted in more than 41.5 million cases of COVID-19 and 1 million
deaths. The majority of COVID-19 cases currently being reported are predominantly in developed countries,
such as the United States, Brazil, Russia, and France. Despite the increasing number of models and stud-
ies on COVID-19, there is very little information available to inform humanitarian response interventions,
the need for which may be unprecedented, particularly where infrastructure is lacking to effectively prevent
spread of transmission and treat affected patients.
In late 2019, the United Nations (UN) Ofﬁce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Centre
for Humanitarian Data created a new workstream for predictive analytics. This was based on demand from
OCHA’s leadership to “use data, and especially the tools of predictive analytics to get ahead, to be more an-
ticipatory, to predict what is about to happen and to trigger the response earlier.” This ambition aligns with
the overall goal of the Centre, which is to increase the use and impact of data in the humanitarian sector.
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought into stark focus the need for data and the value of models to inform
response strategies. Anticipatory action is no longer an abstract idea but something populations are actively
doing by staying home and increasing the number of hospital beds to protect the most vulnerable popula-
tions.
Epidemic forecasting is one tool through which we can gain an understanding of the ﬁnal outbreak size
and indicators of when the COVID-19 epidemic peaks in a country. This provides decision-makers with the
capability to plan, surge, and manage resources during a pandemic. UN OCHA and the Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Applied Physics Laboratory have therefore established a partnership to inform COVID-19 strategies
for humanitarian interventions by both national authorities and the humanitarian community in selected
high-priority countries, resulting in increased technical capacity to predict new and compounded humani-
tarian needs, and use of data science to arrive at interventions to mitigate them.
This partnership developed a series of adjustments to a novel COVID-19 model (JHUAPL-Bucky) that in-
corporates different vulnerability factors to provide insights on the scale of the crisis in priority countries
at national and sub-national levels, how different response interventions are expected to impact the epi-
demic curve, and the duration of the crisis in speciﬁc locations. The resultant model (OCHA-Bucky) strati-
ﬁes COVID-19 dynamics by age and population vulnerability. Input to the model consists of geographically
distributed COVID-19 cases and deaths, as well as attributes such as inter-regional mobility, population vul-
nerability, nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) , and social contact matrices. Model output consists of
future projections of these same quantities, as well as severe cases (deﬁned as a proportion of total cases).
The model considers both inter-regional mobility of the population and time-varying NPIs. OCHA-Bucky has
been used to provide weekly projections to six OCHA country ofﬁces: Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Iraq, Somalia, Sudan, and South Sudan.
The results of this model, when applied in the context of the United States, have been included in the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) COVID-19 Mathematical Modeling Forecasting Ensemble [1]. Here,
we detail the modiﬁcations of the JHUAPL-Bucky model used to shift results to the context of countries in
receipt of humanitarian aid.
A number of critical complementary components must be modiﬁed in order to perform accurate disease
modeling within this context. Namely, these include:
• Estimating disease parameters;
• Acquiring data sources that accurately reﬂect both the current and historical states of the outbreak;
• Estimating mobility within a country;
• Estimating the impact of secondary/tertiary factors on the vulnerability of a given population;
• Estimations of the effects of measures taken by individuals and governments to curb the spread of
the disease; and
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 3

--------------------------------------------------
• Estimations of the effects of the above at both the sub-national and national levels.
The following sections describe the OCHA-Bucky model in detail. Section 2.1 gives an overview of the model
and its components. Further details related to parameter estimation, data sourcing, and model initialization
are given in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively. Section 3 details the model input and output. Lastly, this model
is publicly available; details about how to access the model as well as the corresponding documentation
are given in Section 4.
2
Model Description
The JHUAPL-Bucky model is a COVID-19 metapopulation compartment model initially designed to estimate
medium-term (on the order of weeks) case incidence and healthcare usage at the second administrative
(admin-2, ADM2) level (counties in the United States; cities or districts in various countries). These ADM2
regions are all coupled using mobility information to approximate the inter- and intra-regional contacts be-
tween the members of the populations. Using the historical case and death data, local demographic data,
and a set of parameters derived from empirical studies (Section 2.2.1), the model infers a number of local-
ized features (given in Table 1) that are related to the spread of COVID-19. Projecting forward in time, Bucky
then uses an age-stratiﬁed compartment model to estimate the case load as well as provide outputs relating
to the healthcare burden of each locality. These time forecasts are performed numerous times (Monte Carlo
experiments), with each individual simulation using minor modiﬁcations to the input parameters at random,
scaled to the uncertainty of the estimates. The resulting collection of simulations is then used to obtain
probabilistic estimates for all output variables. A fork of JHUAPL-Bucky, the OCHA-Bucky model, addition-
ally includes a set of new features to properly handle the unique aspects of epidemic modeling in countries
beyond the United States. To this end, the OCHA-Bucky model includes a series of factors related to the
relative vulnerability of local populations.
2.1
Model Overview
At its base, the OCHA-Bucky model is a spatially distributed SEIR model. SEIR models are a class of determin-
istic models used to demonstrate how infectious diseases that are spread by person-to-person transmission
in a population. The simplest versions of such models are systems of ordinary differential equations and
are analysed mathematically [2].
Within the context of an SEIR model, disease dynamics are modeled over time by moving the population
through a series of compartments (otherwise known as "bins" or "states"). Those states are as follows:
• Susceptible (S): the fraction of the population that could be potentially subjected to the infection;
• Exposed (E): the fraction of the population that has been infected but does not show symptoms yet;
• Infectious (I): the fraction of the population that is infective after the latent period;
• Recovered (R): the fraction of the population that has been infected and recovered from the infection.
The total population is represented by the sum of the compartments. Basic assumptions of this type of
model:
• Once the model is initialized, no individuals are added to the susceptible group. It follows that births
and natural deaths are unaccounted for, migration into and out of the region is frozen for the duration
of a simulation, and none of the population has been vaccinated or is immune to the pathogen;
• The population within each strata is uniform, and each pair of individuals within the strata are equally
likely to interact;
• The probability of interaction between individuals in the population is not rare;
• Once infected, an individual cannot be reinfected with the virus.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 4

--------------------------------------------------
Sij
Eij
Ihosp
ij
Imild
ij
Iasym
ij
Rij
Rhosp
ij
Dij
βij
(1 −α)ηi(νj)σ
(1 −α)(1 −ηi(νj))σ
α(1 −ηi(νj))σ
γ
γ
(1 −φi)γ
τi
φiγ
Figure 1: Model Diagram. See Table 1 for a description of the compartments and transition parameters. Note
that the compartments E, Iasym, Imild, Ihosp and Rhosp are gamma-distributed with shape parameters speciﬁed
in the conﬁguration ﬁle.
The OCHA-Bucky model consists of a collection of coupled and stratiﬁed SEIR models. Since COVID-19
exhibits heavily age-dependent properties, wherein a majority of severe cases are in older individuals, SEIR
models are stratiﬁed via the age demographic structure of a geographic region to obtain accurate estimates
of case severity and deaths. Additionally, to model the spatial dynamics of COVID spread, we consider a set
of SEIR sub-models at the smallest geographic level for which we have appropriate data. (See Section 2.3
for a discussion of available data.)
The basic structure of the model is displayed in Figure 1. Age is denoted by index i, and geographic regions
are denoted by index j. Within each strata, OCHA-Bucky models the susceptible and exposed populations,
followed by one of three possible infected states: asymptomatic (Iasym), mild (Imild), and severe (Ihosp). Mem-
bers of the population who are either asymptomatic or exhibit mild symptoms recover from the virus at a
rate γ. Those who exhibit severe symptoms and are in need of healthcare support will either recover after a
period of illness at rate 1/τi or expire as a result of the virus at rate φiγ.
A critical component of the OCHA-Bucky model is the parameterization of the model (Section 2.2). A number
of parameters must be derived and/or estimated from their original data sources. These include, but are not
limited to, those listed in Table 1 as well as local estimates of local case doubling time, case reporting rate,
case fatality rate, and case hospitalization rate. Further details of these quantities as well as how they are
estimated are given in Section 2.2. All parameter estimation for the model includes the basic assumption
that, once estimated and initialized, these parameters remain constant during the simulation period.
Coupling individual age and geographically stratiﬁed sub-models occurs across a number of dimensions
including disease state and pre-existing vulnerability. Sub-models are coupled together using both the spa-
tial mobility matrix (see Section 2.3.3) and age-based contact matrices (see Section 2.3.5). Modeling of the
overall interaction rates between geographic locations and age groups is an important component in ac-
curately modeling non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs). OCHA-Bucky accounts for the implementation
of NPIs (e.g., school closures, border closures, face mask wearing) via modifying either the social contact
matrices or the basic reproductive number, R0. Further details are given in Section 2.3.6.
Together, these components contribute to a model that is adaptable to a number of contexts. OCHA-Bucky
is calibrated to the uncertainties in the case data and the disease parameters, leading to a model that is
robust to the quality and resolution of available input data.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 5

--------------------------------------------------
Variable
Description
Sij
Proportion of individuals who are susceptible to the virus
Eij
Proportion of individuals who have been exposed to the virus
Ihosp
ij
Proportion of individuals that are exhibiting severe disease symptoms, and are in need of a
healthcare facility
Imild
ij
Proportion of individuals that are exhibiting mild disease symptoms
Iasymp
ij
Proportion of individuals who are infected but asymptomatic
Rij
Proportion of individuals who have recovered from the virus and are no longer capable of
infecting other individuals
Rhosp
ij
Proportion of individuals who have recovered from the virus after a period of time in a health-
care facility
Dij
Proportion of individuals who have succumbed as a direct result of the virus
Parameter
Description
βij
Force of infection on a member of age group i in location j
1/σ
Viral latent period
α
Rate of infections that are asymptomatic
ηi(νj)
Fraction of cases necessitating healthcare facilities for age group i as a function of the
local vulnerability index, νj
φi
Case fatality rate for age group i
1/γ
Infectious period
τi
Recovery period from severe infection for age group i
Table 1: Description of OCHA-Bucky model variables and parameters corresponding to Figure 1.
2.2
Model Parameterization
2.2.1
Disease/Healthcare Parameters
The CDC has published pandemic planning scenarios [3] that contain recommended parameters describing
biological and epidemiological factors. Of these ﬁve planning scenarios, OCHA-Bucky uses scenario ﬁve,
which contains the CDC’s current best estimates for disease severity and transmission. These parameters
are described in detail, based on information available from the CDC, and summarized in Table 2.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 6

--------------------------------------------------
Parameter Description
Bucky Variable Name
Value (Interquartile Range)
Fraction of infections that are asymptomatic, α
asym_frac
0.4
Relative infectiousness of asymptomatic indi-
viduals
rel_inf_asym
0.75
Fraction of transmission prior to symptom onset
frac_trans_before_sym
0.5
Mean serial interval (days)
Ts
6 (5.7)
Mean generation interval (days)
Tg
7 (5.5, 8.5)
Case fatality ratio, φi
CFR
0-49 years : 0.0005
50-64 years: 0.002
65+ years: 0.013
Case hospitalization ratio, ηi
CHR
0-49 years : 0.017
50-64 years: 0.045
65+ years: 0.074
Time from symptom onset to hospitalization
(days)
I_TO_H_TIME
0-49 years : 6
50-64 years: 6
65+ years: 4
Duration of hospitalization (days)
H_TIME
0-49 years : 4.9
50-64 years: 7.6
65+ years: 8.1
Time between death and reporting (days)
D_REPORT_TIME
0-49 years : 7.1
50-64 years: 7.2
65+ years: 6.6
Table 2: CDC-Recommended Parameters as described in Scenario 5 of [3].
2.2.1.1
Disease Transmission
The following parameters describe the transmissibility of the virus. The percentage of infections that are
asymptomatic (α) refers to the percentage of infections that will never develop symptoms. This is a difﬁcult
parameter to estimate due to logistical complications (individuals would need to be tested to ensure they
remain asymptomatic while infectious) and because the level of asymptomatic infections varies by age.
The best estimate for this parameter is the midpoint between the lower bound of [4], the upper bound of [5],
which corresponds to the estimates from [6].
The relative infectiousness of asymptomatic individuals compared to symptomatic individuals (rel_inf_asym)
is calculated using upper and lower bounds on the difference in viral dynamics between asymptomatic and
symptomatic cases. The lower bound is derived from data indicating that more severe cases have higher
viral loads [7] and a study that indicates symptomatic cases shed for longer and have higher viral loads
than asymptomatic cases [8]. Other studies indicate that both symptomatic and asymptomatic cases have
similar duration and viral shedding [9], which is used as the upper bound.
The ﬁnal parameter relating to disease transmission is the fraction of transmission prior to symptom onset
(frac_trans_before_sym), which corresponds to the percentage of new cases caused by transmission from
an individual before they become symptomatic. The lower bound is derived from [10], with the upper bound
derived from [11].
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 7

--------------------------------------------------
2.2.1.2
Disease Characteristics and Severity
The mean serial interval, Ts, is the time in days from exposure to onset of symptoms and is taken from [12].
The mean generation interval, Tg, is the period of time (in days) between symptom onset for one individual
and symptom onset for a person they have infected. This value is from [10].
The case fatality ratio (CFR) is the number of individuals who will die of the disease; the case hospitalization-
severity ratio (CHR) corresponds to the number of cases that are severe and necessitate hospitalization.
Within the context of the United States, this ratio corresponds to the individuals admitted to a hospital. In a
context where access to medical care is limited, this ratio corresponds to the ratio of individuals who exhibit
severe disease symptoms.
Hospital-related parameters are derived using data from COVID-Net [13] and the CDC’s Data Collation and
Integration for Public Health Event Response (DCIPHER). All data is taken from the period between March
1, 2020 to July 15, 2020 unless otherwise noted. The time it takes from symptom onset to hospitalization
in days is denoted by I_to_H_time. The number of days an individual will be hospitalized is H_TIME. Finally,
the number of days between death and reporting is D_REPORT_TIME.
2.2.2
Approximated and Derived Parameters
Unless otherwise noted, the model parameters that are derived from input parameters1 and the historical
data are estimated as the average value across the entire population of a region (i.e., they are not age-
stratiﬁed). This limitation results from having a lack of age-stratiﬁed historical case and death data in most
regions. Additionally, some parameters are only derived at the national (ADM0) level due to sparse reporting
at the sub-national level (see footnotes).
• Local mean Case Fatality Ratio, φj;
We must begin by estimating the local overall CFR for each region based on the local demographics.
Since the fatality rate for COVID-19 is highly age dependent, this overall CFR will vary dramatically
between region with different age structure [15]. By contracting the CFR as a function of age with the
local age demographics of each region, we can obtain the region overall estimate for the CFR,
φj = φiNij.
• Case Reporting Rate, ρj;
In order to estimate the local fraction of COVID-19 cases that are reported in the historical data, OCHA-
Bucky uses a method similar to Russel et al. [16] based on the deviation from the expected CFR. Using
the derived CFR and the historical case and death data, the OCHA-Bucky model ﬁrst estimates the
overall case reporting rate for symptomatic cases at the ADM2 level. This is done using the assumption
that the ratio of the expected CFR for each region based on the local demographics, φj to the CFR
calculated from the cumulative historical data, φhist
j
2 i.e.
ρj =
φj
φhist
j
= φiNij
φhist
j
.
In calculating φdata
j
, a lag in the reporting of deaths equal to the given input parameter is assumed ??.
The estimated case reporting rate for each of the last X number of days is then calculated; the mean
value in each region is used.
• Doubling Time, TD;
1Throughout our discussion in this section we make use of Einstein notation[14] to describe the mathematics. This is owed to the
fact that most of the variables are tensors by virtue of the fact that they are stratiﬁed in multiple ways (e.g., age and locality)
Most importantly, we use the notation of a tensor contraction to represent the summed multiplication along an axis. i.e. cixi =
P
i cixi for all indices that appear as both upper and lower indices in a single term but are otherwise undeﬁned.
2In OCHA-Bucky, the the value is the CFR derived from the historical data, φhist
j
is estimated at the the country level from the WHO
country level case/death history and used uniformly throughout all sub-regions. This is done to circumvent potential data issues present
in the local case data in various countries.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 8

--------------------------------------------------
Rather then explicitly include a parameter controlling the transmission rate, Bucky uses the recent
historical data to estimate transmission at the local level 3. The local doubling time TD,j is estimated
by ﬁrst considering the historical data prior to the date in which the simulation will begin. Historical
data is used to calculate the doubling time for the seven days prior to simulation. These historical
doubling times are then averaged to yield the value of TD,j for a particular simulation. Once these
values are calculated, methods similar to those described in [17] can be used to estimate the latent
period, 1/σ, infectious period, 1/γ, as well as an estimate of the effective R0 value. These methods
also yield the shape parameters of the gamma-distributions corresponding to E, Iasym, Imild, and Ihosp
compartments.
• Case Hospitalization Ratio with Vulnerability, ηi(νj);
To account for the inclusion of the vulnerability index in OCHA-Bucky, we rescale the population frac-
tion requiring healthcare support (the CHR, ηi) based on the local fraction of vulnerable population,
νj:
ηi(νj) = (1 −νj)ηi + V νjηi
where V is the relative severity among the vulnerable population (See 2.3.2 for how this is estimated).
• Contact rate between susceptible and infected individuals, βij;
The quantity βij represents the average number of contacts per person per time, multiplied by the prob-
ability of disease transmission in a contact between a susceptible and an infectious subject. Within
Bucky, this consists of the rate that an individual in age group i in location j gets infected by the virus.
This depends on three quantities:
1. The infectivity rate of the virus;
2. The average contact between someone from age group i and individuals across all other age
groups;
3. The average rate of mobility into location j from across all other locations in the simulation.
2.3
Data Sources
2.3.1
Population Data
In order to estimate the age- and sex-disaggregated population for each ADM2 region two different datasets
are combined:
• Administrative boundaries shapeﬁles at the ADM2 level from the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX);
• United Nations -adjusted WorldPop age and sex disaggregated population raster data.
Input consists of raster data with the administrative region polygons for the province/state (ADM1) and
district/county (ADM2) to get total populations for each region, stratiﬁed by age and sex. Then, values are
scaled so that the total population is consistent with the regional UN-adjusted population.
2.3.2
Vulnerability Parameters
The fraction of the population in an ADM2 region that is particularly vulnerable to COVID-19 is estimated by
calculating the proportion of the population effected by those factors described in Sections 2.3.2.1 – 2.3.2.4.
To avoid confounding factors contributing to a population’s increased vulnerability, we select the maximum
of these proportions and consider this to be the proportion of the population that is at increased vulnerability
to the effects of COVID-19. Those in the population that are considered vulnerable have a higher risk of a
severe case or death (and hence a higher CHR and CFR) than non-vulnerable members of a region. Given
literature estimates, the vulnerable population is given a CHR that is 1.5 times greater than the average CHR
of a region (calculated via age and gender demographic information). 4
3In OCHA-Bucky, this estimation if performed at the nation level using WHO case data, similar to the estimation of reported CFR.
4The CFR carries the CHR scalar multiplication forward since CFR is estimated as a proportion of those with severe cases.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 9

--------------------------------------------------
2.3.2.1
Urban/Rural disaggregation
Although not a risk factor on its own, there are several vulnerabilities that scale differently with urban and
rural populations. The COVID-19 crisis has impacted urban areas signiﬁcantly more than rural areas, due
primarily to mobility and proximity to other ADM2 regions, which increase transmission rates. Urban/rural
stratiﬁcation is available in raster format from WorldPop. To calculate the urban-rural fraction for each ADM2
region, data is taken from Global Human Settlement Layer. Based on the classiﬁcations available in [18]
anything denser than suburban (class 21 or above) is considered to be urban, and the rest to be rural.
2.3.2.2
Food insecurity
There is evidence that weight impacts the severity of inﬂuenza and other respiratory viruses [19]. We have
used food security as an indicator of population weight and other factors that effect the populations base-
line ability to respond to respiratory illness. Hence, we scale our our vulnerability factor, νj by levels of food
security within the region. Food insecurity data is obtained from the Integrated Food Security Phase Clas-
siﬁcation (IPC) Global Platform. The proportion of individuals living in regions at IPC level 3 or greater are
considered at-risk. The data tend to have a mix of information at the ADM1 and ADM2 levels; the most
granular data is utilized for this calculation.
2.3.2.3
Indoor air pollution - indoor cooking fuels
The use of indoor cooking fuels is a risk factor for COVID-19 whose prevalence depends on an urban or rural
setting. Data on the use of solid fuels is obtained from the World Health Organization. The total fraction of
the population using solid fuels is calculated by re-scaling at each location the urban/rural estimates from
WHO by the corresponding urban/rural population fraction estimated according to 2.3.2.1. There is evidence
linking indoor air pollution and respiratory illness [20]. Based on the available literature, we estimated that
those that used solid cooking fuels are 1.8 times more likely to develop a severe infection.
2.3.2.4
Medical comorbidities
Medical co-morbidities, such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and tuberculosis, were considered as pos-
sible additional vulnerability parameters for cases and deaths. However, the OCHA-Bucky model does not
use these parameters, as they are highly correlated with age and gender, and have little additional impact
on vulnerability and death rate estimates.
2.3.3
Mobility Data and Matrix Generation
A required input of the model is the amount of interaction that occurs between different regions at the sub-
national level. Mobility matrix data is used to simulate disease spread across different administrative units
of a country. The JHUAPL-Bucky model assumes contact between various regions through using a combi-
nation of various sources of cell-phone based mobility estimates. In the OCHA-Bucky model, due to a lack
of mobile phone based estimates, contact between ADM2 regions is approximated through an analysis of
road network data.
Road density data from Humanitarian OpenStreetMap (HOTOSM) is used to estimate the strength of the
connection between all ADM2 regions considered. To create the mobility matrix using roads data, a roads
shapeﬁle is read, and roads that intersect with at least one ADM2 border are kept. For each road, a list is
then created of which ADM2 regions the road passes through. Completing this gives a list of region to re-
gion pairs, for which geographic distance (between ADM2 geographic centroids) and road connectivity are
calculated. To calculate road connectivity, road network lines are obtained from HOTOSM on HDX. The road
classiﬁcation system from HOTOSM is used to apply weights for each road type, calculated by multiplying
the estimated typical speed and number of lanes for each road class; connectivity is deﬁned as the sum of
all roads connecting the region pair.
Road connectivity, the motor vehicle ownership fraction, and the reciprocal geographic distance between
regions are all then multiplied together to give estimates of connectivity between ADM2 pairs. Adjacent
regions with many large road connections necessarily have higher connectivity values than those which
have few small or even no road connections. Long-range or non-adjacent interactions between regions are
also considered, especially in cases where a road crosses more than two regional boundaries. However,
the diminishing weakness of non-adjacent ADM2 pairs is captured through the reciprocal of the geographic
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 10

--------------------------------------------------
centroids; higher values indicate closer regions.
Within the model, the probability of the disease to spread from one ADM2 region to another is proportional
to the estimated weights in the mobility matrix.
2.3.4
COVID-19 Cases and Deaths
Sub-national historical daily number of COVID-19 cases are obtained from HDX. In most countries of interest,
the source for COVID case counts is the nation’s Ministry of Public Health. Additional federal (ADM0) histor-
ical data is also obtained from the WHO. Data is usually available at the ADM1 level. To obtain ADM2-level
case counts, ADM1 case counts are scaled using the ADM2 population.
2.3.5
Contact Matrix
Contact matrices quantify how much people from different age groups interact, and are extracted from Prem
et al. [21]. The contact matrices used are taken from the home, school, work, and other locations. For some
countries, the contact matrix is not directly available. In these instances, a country in the same region and
with similar socioeconomic indicators is used as a proxy.5
2.3.6
Non-pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs)
NPIs are mitigations, apart from getting vaccinated and taking medicine, that people and communities can
take to help slow the spread of communicable diseases. As a vaccine for COVID-19 has yet to be deployed,
NPIs are among the the best strategies for controlling the spread of the current COVID-19 virus. The struc-
ture of the OCHA-Bucky model allows for the incorporation of NPIs via the modiﬁcation of a combination
of the following : the basic reproduction number, local contact matrices, and inter-regional mobility matrices.
For each country an initial list of NPIs was obtained from the ACAPS COVID-19 Government Measures
Dataset. This dataset is complemented with additional qualitative information from in-country stakeholders.
The estimated compliance level are tailored to speciﬁc countries.
2.3.6.1
Implementation of Nonpharmaceutical Interventions
NPIs are categorized and implemented in OCHA-Bucky based on their classiﬁcation into three categories:
1. Contact-Matrix Based NPIs;
These NPIs are those that effect only certain age groups within the total population. These NPI effect
the ratios relating the components of the contact matrices. The NPI that fall under this category are:
• School closure
• Shielding elderly
2. Mobility Based NPI;
This classiﬁcation is for those NPI that lead to changes in mobility/movement between administra-
tive districts (as opposed to movement within an administrative district). The NPI that fall under this
category are :
• Closing of borders, ports, and/or international ﬂights
• Restricting inter-regional movement
3. Reproduction Number Based NPI;
This classiﬁcation is for those NPI that have an effect on the overall scaling of transmissibility. It
encompasses both intra-regional measures to reduce transmission as well as national level initiatives
designed to reduce transmission throughout the country. The NPI that fall under this category are :
• Social distancing;
5The model from The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine also utilizes this strategy.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 11

--------------------------------------------------
• Face mask wearing;
• Installation of hand washing stations;
• Reduction of size of public gatherings;
• Closing businesses;
• Partial lockdown;
• Awareness campaigns (e.g., vaccination programs).
A summary of the NPIs that are currently implemented in OCHA-Bucky are given in Table 3. This table in-
cludes the classiﬁcation, effects, and sources that are currently being used to approximate the effects of
various NPI.
With the current implementation, we have the ability to distinguish between the effects of NPI within the
categories mentioned above. For the case in which multiple NPI within category III are implemented, we
have implemented a value-added approach to calculating their effectiveness in reducing the basic repro-
duction number. In this case, we calculate the reduction in R0 based on the number of NPIs in place. If 1 NPI
is in place, R0 is reduced by 40%. If 2 NPI are in place, R0 is reduced by 60%. If 3 or more NPI are in place,
then R0 is reduced by 70%.
NPI Classiﬁcation
Effect in Model
Mean Reduction (SD)
Source
Contact-based:
School Closure
Reduce
contact
between
school
aged
groups
and
increase the contacts in the
home environment
∼44% reduction in overall
community transmission
[22]
Mobility-based
Reduction
in
mobility
be-
tween regions
60% (10)
[23][22]
Reproduction Number-based
60-85% reduction in overall
community transmission
72.5% (6.25)
[24][25]
Table 3: Summary of Effects of NPI on model components
3
Model Initialization and Output
Using the data sources and methods described in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, we are able to both estimate values
of parameters initialize the values of all the compartments in the model on the last date of the historical
data. This will serve as the initial state of our simulation.
As output, OCHA-Bucky generates one data ﬁle per Monte Carlo run. The ﬁles contain data at the ADM2
level and are indexed by data and run ID. This data is post-processed to combine data across all the dates
and simulations. It can then be aggregated at desired geographic levels. A separate ﬁle is created for each
administrative level, with each row indexed by date, admin ID, and quantile. The columns of this output ﬁle
are described in Table 4.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 12

--------------------------------------------------
Index name
Description
adm0, adm1, or adm2
The adm ID corresponding to the geographic level
date
The date
quantile
Quantile value
Column name
Description
case_reporting_rate
Case reporting rate
active_asymptomatic_cases
Current number of actively infectious but asymp-
tomatic cases
cumulative_cases
Cumulative number of cumulative cases (including
unreported)
cumulative_deaths
Cumulative number of deaths
cumulative_deaths_per_100k
Cumulative number of deaths per 100,000 people
cumulative_reported_cases
Cumulative number of reported cases
cumulative_reported_cases_per_100k
Number of reported cumulative cases per 100,000
people
current_hospitalizations
Number of active severe cases
current_hospitalizations_per_100k
Number of active cases per 100,000 people
current_icu_usage
ICU bed usage∗
current_vent_usage
Current ventilator usage∗
total_population
Population
daily_cases
Number of daily new cases (including unreported)
daily_deaths
Number of daily new deaths
daily_hospitalizations
Number of daily new severe cases
daily_reported_cases
Number of reported daily new cases
doubling_t
Local doubling time as estimated from the histori-
cal data
R_eff
Local effective reproductive number
Table 4: Model output column descriptions.
∗indicates model outputs that are not calibrated/validated for the context of low-middle income countries.
4
Model Open Source Code and Documentation
Further documentation and resources can be found in the following locations.
• For documentation related to the United States version of the model (JHUAPL-Bucky) :
– The JHUAPL-Bucky model is available on Github at https://github.com/mattkinsey/bucky.
– Documentation for JHUAPL-Bucky is available at https://docs.buckymodel.com/en/stable/.
• For the latest resources on the international version of the model (OCHA-Bucky) :
– The OCHA-Bucky model is available on Github at https://github.com/OCHA-DAP/pa-ocha-bucky.
– Documentation for OCHA-Bucky is available at
https://ocha-bucky.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 13

--------------------------------------------------
5
References
[1] C. for Disease Control, Prevention, et al., “Covid-19 mathematical modeling forecasts,” URL:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/mathematical-modeling.html Accessed Octo-
ber, vol. 18, 2020.
[2] H. W. Hethcote, Three Basic Epidemiological Models, pp. 119–144. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1989.
[3] C. for Disease Control, Prevention, et al., “Covid-19 pandemic planning scenarios,” URL: https://www.
cdc. gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios. html Accessed May, vol. 29, 2020.
[4] O. Byambasuren, M. Cardona, K. Bell, J. Clark, M.-L. McLaws, and P. Glasziou, “Estimating the extent
of true asymptomatic covid-19 and its potential for community transmission: systematic review and
meta-analysis,” Available at SSRN 3586675, 2020.
[5] P. Poletti, M. Tirani, D. Cereda, F. Trentini, G. Guzzetta, G. Sabatino, V. Marziano, A. Castroﬁno, F. Grosso,
G. Del Castillo, et al., “Probability of symptoms and critical disease after sars-cov-2 infection,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2006.08471, 2020.
[6] D. P. Oran and E. J. Topol, “Prevalence of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infection: A narrative review,” Annals
of Internal Medicine, 2020.
[7] Y. Liu, L.-M. Yan, L. Wan, T.-X. Xiang, A. Le, J.-M. Liu, M. Peiris, L. L. Poon, and W. Zhang, “Viral dynamics
in mild and severe cases of covid-19,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020.
[8] J. Y. Noh, J. G. Yoon, H. Seong, W. S. Choi, J. W. Sohn, H. J. Cheong, W. J. Kim, and J. Y. Song, “Asymp-
tomatic infection and atypical manifestations of covid-19: comparison of viral shedding duration,” The
Journal of Infection, 2020.
[9] S. Lee, T. Kim, E. Lee, C. Lee, H. Kim, H. Rhee, S. Y. Park, H.-J. Son, S. Yu, J. W. Park, et al., “Clinical
course and molecular viral shedding among asymptomatic and symptomatic patients with sars-cov-2
infection in a community treatment center in the republic of korea,” JAMA internal medicine, 2020.
[10] X. He, E. H. Lau, P. Wu, X. Deng, J. Wang, X. Hao, Y. C. Lau, J. Y. Wong, Y. Guan, X. Tan, et al., “Temporal
dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of covid-19,” Nature medicine, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 672–675,
2020.
[11] M. Casey, J. Grifﬁn, C. G. McAloon, A. W. Byrne, J. M. Madden, D. McEvoy, A. B. Collins, K. Hunt, A. Bar-
ber, F. Butler, et al., “Estimating pre-symptomatic transmission of covid-19: a secondary analysis using
published data,” medRxiv, 2020.
[12] C. McAloon, Á. Collins, K. Hunt, A. Barber, A. W. Byrne, F. Butler, M. Casey, J. Grifﬁn, E. Lane, D. McEvoy,
et al., “Incubation period of covid-19: a rapid systematic review and meta-analysis of observational re-
search,” BMJ open, vol. 10, no. 8, p. e039652, 2020.
[13] CDC, “The coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19)-associated hospitalization surveillance network (covid-
net).”
[14] Wikipedia contributors, “Einstein notation,” 2020. [Online; accessed 14-October-2020].
[15] A. Hauser, M. J. Counotte, C. C. Margossian, G. Konstantinoudis, N. Low, C. L. Althaus, and J. Riou, “Esti-
mation of sars-cov-2 mortality during the early stages of an epidemic: A modeling study in hubei, china,
and six regions in europe,” PLoS medicine, vol. 17, pp. e1003189–e1003189, Jul 2020. 32722715[pmid].
[16] T. W. Russell, N. Golding, J. Hellewell, S. Abbott, L. Wright, C. A. Pearson, K. van Zandvoort, C. I. Jarvis,
H. Gibbs, Y. Liu, et al., “Reconstructing the early global dynamics of under-ascertained covid-19 cases
and infections,” medRxiv, 2020.
[17] M. Roberts and J. Heesterbeek, “Model-consistent estimation of the basic reproduction number from
the incidence of an emerging infection,” Journal of mathematical biology, vol. 55, no. 5-6, p. 803, 2007.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 14

--------------------------------------------------
[18] A. Florczyk, C. Corbane, D. Ehrlich, S. Freire, T. Kemper, L. Maffenini, M. Melchiorri, M. Pesaresi, P. Politis,
M. Schiavina, F. Sabo, and L. Zanchetta, “Ghsl data package 2019,” 07 2019.
[19] J.-A. S. Moser, A. Galindo-Fraga, A. A. Ortiz-Hernández, W. Gu, S. Hunsberger, J.-F. Galán-Herrera, M. L.
Guerrero, G. M. Ruiz-Palacios, J. H. Beigel, L. R. I. . S. Group, et al., “Underweight, overweight, and obesity
as independent risk factors for hospitalization in adults and children from inﬂuenza and other respira-
tory viruses,” Inﬂuenza and other respiratory viruses, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–9, 2019.
[20] R. Pérez-Padilla, A. Schilmann, and H. Riojas-Rodriguez, “Respiratory health effects of indoor air pollu-
tion,” The International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 1079–1086, 2010.
[21] K. Prem, A. R. Cook, and M. Jit, “Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact sur-
veys and demographic data,” PLoS computational biology, vol. 13, no. 9, p. e1005697, 2017.
[22] C. R. Wells, P. Sah, S. M. Moghadas, A. Pandey, A. Shoukat, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, L. A. Meyers, B. H. Singer,
and A. P. Galvani, “Impact of international travel and border control measures on the global spread of
the novel 2019 coronavirus outbreak,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 117, no. 13,
pp. 7504–7509, 2020.
[23] B. J. Cowling, S. T. Ali, T. W. Y. Ng, T. K. Tsang, J. C. M. Li, M. W. Fong, Q. Liao, M. Y. Kwan, S. L. Lee, S. S.
Chiu, J. T. Wu, P. Wu, and G. M. Leung, “Impact assessment of non-pharmaceutical interventions against
coronavirus disease 2019 and inﬂuenza in hong kong: an observational study,” The Lancet Public Health,
vol. 5, pp. e279–e288, May 2020.
[24] C. I. Jarvis, K. Van Zandvoort, A. Gimma, K. Prem, P. Klepac, G. J. Rubin, and W. J. Edmunds, “Quantifying
the impact of physical distance measures on the transmission of covid-19 in the uk,” BMC medicine,
vol. 18, pp. 1–10, 2020.
[25] L. C. Joseph, P.-S. Javier, A. S. Andrew, R. Andrea, and F. Jacques, “Assessing the impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on sars-cov-2 transmission in switzerland,” Swiss Medical Weekly,
vol. 150, no. ARTICLE, p. w20295, 2020.
The Centre for Humanitarian Data centre.humdata.org | Join our mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | Twitter: @humdata | Email: centrehumdata@un.org 15

--------------------------------------------------
